# @dpaskhin/unique

**@dpaskhin/unique** is a TypeScript library that ensures the uniqueness of generated values. It wraps any function to
reject
duplicate values and generate new ones until a unique result is produced. Useful for cases where you need unique random
values or want to prevent repeated results.

## Installation

To install **@dpaskhin/unique**, run:

```shell
npm install --save-dev @dpaskhin/unique
```

## Features

- Ensures uniqueness of generated values by using a custom or global store.
- Configurable with options like maximum retries, timeouts, and exclusion of specific values.

## Usage

#### Basic Example

Here’s a quick example using **@dpaskhin/unique** with a custom function:

```ts
import { unique } from '@dpaskhin/unique';

const randomNumber = () => Math.floor(Math.random() * 100);

const uniqueRandomNumber = unique(randomNumber, [], { maxRetries: 5 });

console.log(uniqueRandomNumber); // Outputs a unique random number each time
```

#### Example with Faker.js

**@dpaskhin/unique** works well with libraries like Faker.js for generating unique random data.

```ts
import { unique } from '@dpaskhin/unique';
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker';

const uniqueName = unique(faker.person.firstName, ['male'], { maxRetries: 10 });

console.log(uniqueName); // Outputs a unique first name
```

## API Reference

### uniqueFactory(fn, options)

Creates a function that ensures unique results based on the provided function fn.

#### Parameters

- fn - The function used to generate values.
- options - Optional. An object containing configuration options:
  - store (Set) - A custom store to track unique values. Defaults to a new Set.
  - maxRetries (number) - The maximum number of retries for unique values. Defaults to 50.
  - maxTime (number) - The maximum allowed time (in ms) for generating a unique value. Defaults to 50ms.
  - exclude (Array) - Values to exclude from the result set.

#### Returns

A function that generates unique values based on fn with the same signature.

#### Example

```ts
import { uniqueFactory } from '@dpaskhin/unique';
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker';

const uniqueAddress = uniqueFactory(faker.location.city, { maxRetries: 5 });

console.log(uniqueAddress()); // Outputs a unique city name
```

### unique(fn, args, options)

Generates a unique value by running fn and ensuring uniqueness via either a provided or global store.

#### Parameters

- fn - The function used to generate values.
- args - Optional. An array of arguments to be passed to fn.
- options - Optional. An object containing configuration options:
  - store (Set) - A custom store to track unique values. Defaults to the global store.
  - maxRetries (number) - The maximum number of retries for unique values. Defaults to 50.
  - maxTime (number) - The maximum allowed time (in ms) for generating a unique value. Defaults to 50ms.
  - exclude (Array) - Values to exclude from the result set.

#### Returns

A unique value generated by fn.

#### Example

```ts
import { unique } from '@dpaskhin/unique';
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker';

const uniqueEmail = unique(faker.internet.email, [
  {
    firstName: faker.person.firstName(),
    lastName: faker.person.lastName(),
  },
]);

console.log(uniqueEmail); // Outputs a unique email address
```

### Best Practices

- Avoid Global Store for Local Uniqueness: If you need to ensure uniqueness only within a specific context or function,
  use a custom store to avoid unexpected results from shared global state.
- Configure Max Retries and Timeouts: Customize maxRetries and maxTime based on the expected uniqueness and complexity
  of generated values.

### Cookbook

1. Global Uniqueness for User IDs

In some cases, you might need global uniqueness across multiple calls or parts of your application. This example shows
how to generate unique user IDs that persist across multiple calls by using the global store:

```ts
import { unique } from '@dpaskhin/unique';
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker';

// Generate a globally unique user ID
const uniqueUserID = unique(faker.string.uuid);

console.log(uniqueUserID); // Outputs a globally unique user ID
```

### License

**@dpaskhin/unique** is licensed under the MIT License.

### Contributing

Contributions are welcome! If you have ideas or improvements, feel free to submit a pull request.
